---
author:
- John Daley and Danielle Wood and Brendan Coates
bibliography:
- '../../bibliography.bib'
title: Super tax targeting
...

Tax breaks for superannuation contributions and earnings
should be targeted more tightly at their policy purpose. The current
system is expensive and unfair.

Superannuation tax breaks mean that less tax is paid on sugitper savings
than is paid on other forms of income. These tax breaks should only be
available when they serve a policy aim. Although the \$2 trillion
superannuation system does not have legislated aims, most believe it
should encourage savings to supplement or replace the Age Pension.

Yet superannuation tax breaks often go well beyond this purpose and
their costs are unsustainable. The tax breaks reduce income tax
collections by more than \$25 billion a year. More than half the
benefits flow to the wealthiest 20 per cent of households who already
have enough resources to fund their own retirement, and whose savings
choices aren’t affected much by tax rates.

Three reforms are needed to target superannuation better.

**‘Concessional contributions’** made from pre-tax income should be
limited to \$11,000 per year. Eighty per cent of contributions above
this level come from the 20 per cent of taxpayers with the highest
incomes, people likely to retire with enough assets to be ineligible for
an Age Pension. This change would improve budget balances by
\$3.5 billion a year. Other options, such as levying higher taxes on
contributions made by higher income earners, would be less well targeted
and more complex to administer. Replacing the annual cap with a lifetime
cap sounds attractive because it appears to allow people with broken
work histories to catch up, but it would mainly turbocharge tax planning
for wealthy older workers.

**Earnings in retirement** – currently untaxed – should be taxed at
15 per cent, the same as superannuation earnings before retirement. More
than half of the benefit of tax-free earnings in retirement goes to the
wealthiest 20 per cent of retirees. For the top 10 per cent of over 60s
drawing on super, the tax benefits are extremely generous – they pay no
tax on their average super earnings of \$85,000 a year. A 15 per cent
tax on all super earnings would improve budget balances by \$2.7 billion
a year today, and much more in future.

The proposed reforms are fair. Low-income earners and younger people
would pay less in other taxes if super tax breaks for the wealthy were
wound back. Those already retired would pay some tax on their
superannuation savings, but they would pay much less tax than wage
earners on similar incomes. For a small proportion of women with higher
incomes later in life, the changes would reduce their catch-up
contributions. Yet the changes would reduce the tax breaks far more for
a lot of rich old men.

The changes to contributions taxes would be prospective. The changes to
earnings tax rates, like changes to income tax rates, would apply to
future earnings of assets already acquired.

Introduction
============

We have a budget problem
------------------------

Grattan Institute’s 2013 report, , concluded that without structural
reforms Australian governments could face a decade of deficits. Our
recent working paper, , showed that this may have been optimistic.

The Commonwealth Government has run deficits for six years, largely due
to a rapid increase in net spending on older households. The costs of
repaying these deficits will fall primarily on younger households.

The next ten years are likely to be even more difficult. Falling terms
of trade and lower nominal economic growth will drag on revenues at the
same time the Commonwealth Government intends to fund substantial new
policy initiatives.

The Commonwealth Government is yet to respond to the scale of its budget
challenges. In office, both major political parties have hoped that
bracket creep and favourable economic conditions would deliver a
surplus. Hope is the key word: over the last six years, outcomes have
consistently been worse than these projections. The latest short- and
medium-term projections rely on optimistic assumptions about organic
revenue growth and spending restraint. If any of them fail to
materialise, the burden on younger generations will increase.

Previous Grattan work has identified pensions and superannuation policy as priorities for budget repair {#sec:prev-grattan-work-identified-super}
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Balancing budgets identified better targeting of pension and
superannuation policies as being among the best opportunities to achieve
budget repair.[^1]

The key choices identified were increasing the age of access for the Age
Pension and superannuation, limiting tax concessions for superannuation,
and including owner-occupied housing in the Age Pension assets test.
Although a government is unlikely to make all these choices
simultaneously, Balancing Budgets estimated that they could collectively
improve the budget bottom line by an estimated \$27 billion a year.

Obviously these choices primarily affect older Australians in the short
term. They emerged as high priorities because tax and welfare policies
for older Australians are less well-targeted to those most in need than
are other policies. Consequently it is easier to identify changes that
deliver substantial improvements to the budget with relatively few
side-effects. These choices will affect all Australians as they age, not
just the current older generation.

Older households are putting the most pressure on Australian budgets
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Budget measures that affect older Australians may also be appropriate
because older Australians are putting most pressure on government
budgets. Grattan’s 2014 report, , showed how the largest spending
increases over the last decade have been increased spending in health
(where governments spend twice as much on each 60 year old as a 30 year
old[^2]) and on the Age Pension. Both of these spending categories grew
substantially faster than GDP, not because of the ageing population, but
because of explicit and implicit choices to spend more per person of a
given age.

Grattan Institute’s report, , argued that Australia’s intergenerational
fiscal bargain was coming under threat as younger generations were being
asked to do more than their fair share. shows how Commonwealth and state
governments combined spent \$9,400 more per household aged over 65 in
2010 than they did six years earlier, reflecting increases in the Age
Pension and rising health spending per person.[^3] At the same time,
average income taxes paid by those aged 65 and over fell in real dollar
terms, despite higher incomes, reflecting the decision by the former
Howard Government to abolish taxes on superannuation withdrawals for
over 60s and to increase the effective tax-free threshold to \$30,000
for retirees’ earnings outside of superannuation. These budgetary
decisions have been funded by deficits. The accumulating debt burden
will disproportionately fall on younger households.[^4]

<span>Average net benefits per household, 2010
dollars</span>\[fig:Wealth-of-generations-chart\]
![image](super-atlas/Figure1-1.pdf)

Transitioning to a fairer set of policies requires careful thought.
Younger generations, on the wrong side of the drawbridge after the
policies change, lose out when they pay for benefits for older
generations that they do not receive themselves. If government reduces
spending on health, pensions and superannuation tax breaks, then younger
generations will be disadvantaged. Exempting older households from the
costs of policy changes – such as by grandfathering existing benefits
and tax breaks – simply magnifies the costs shifted onto younger
generations.

Re-targeting superannuation tax breaks would help fix the budget, and restore the intergenerational bargain
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This report shows how tax breaks for superannuation contributions and
earnings should be targeted more tightly at their policy purpose. The
current system is expensive and unfair. They are the largest and fastest
growing leaks from our income tax system, reducing income tax
collections by over \$25 billion a year.

Better targeting of tax breaks on superannuation contributions could
save \$3.5 billion a year. Restoring taxes on superannuation fund
earnings for those in retirement – as already applies for workers –
could raise another \$2.7 billion a year today, and much more as more
people retire.

Better targeting superannuation tax breaks would also reduce the
transfers between today’s younger taxpayers and older retirees. Taxes on
super earnings in retirement, for example, would most affect those who
have benefitted from windfalls, government largesse and paying lower
taxes while deficits accumulated.

Over the last decade, older households captured most of the growth in
Australia’s wealth. Despite the global financial crisis, households aged
between 65 and 74 years today are \$400,000 (or 27 per cent) wealthier
in real terms than households of that age ten years ago. Meanwhile, the
wealth of households aged 25 to 34 years fell by \$2,000 (or
4 per cent).[^5]

What this report does not do {#sec:what-this-report-does-not-do}
----------------------------

This report focuses on what changes are needed to better align the tax
treatment of superannuation with the overall objectives of our
superannuation system, and to support budget repair.

This report does not advocate **wholesale restructuring of the tax
treatment of retirement savings.**

Private retirement savings can be taxed at three points: on
contributions; investment earnings; and withdrawals. Each stage in the
life of an asset can be described as being either: fully taxed at
marginal rates of personal income tax (<span
style="font-variant:small-caps;">t</span>); taxed more lightly than
marginal rates (t); or exempt from tax (<span
style="font-variant:small-caps;">e</span>). Australia currently has a
<span>ttE</span> approach to taxing most super savings.

A number of commentators have highlighted the benefits of moving to an
expenditure tax treatment of retirement savings. The two most common
expenditure tax approaches, detailed in , are:

1.  **a post-paid expenditure tax (<span>EET</span>)** where
    contributions and earnings are tax-exempt, but withdrawals are taxed
    at a person’s marginal tax rate; and

2.  **a pre-paid expenditure tax (<span>TEE</span>)** where
    contributions are taxed at marginal rates of pesonal income tax, but
    earnings and benefits are tax-exempt. This.

While there are theoretical reasons to prefer an <span>EET</span> system
over a <span>TEE</span> system – for example an <span>EET</span> system
makes it is simpler to tax retirement savings progressively – the costs
of transitioning from a system such as Australia’s are prohibitive.[^6]
Either there would be large windfall losses for the generation affected
by the transition, or government would need to put in place and maintain
complex transitional arrangements (which impose dead-weight
administrative costs) for decades. Shifting to an
<span>EET</span> system would also lead to substantial short-term
revenue shortfalls for Commonwealth governments.[^7]

The alternative, moving to a <span>TEE</span> system,[^8] would impose
the greatest costs on younger generations that would pay much higher
taxes on their super contributions. A <span>TEE</span> system would also
provide a windfall to older generations that contributed most of their
superannuation savings at concessional rates under the current
<span>ttE</span> system. It would further undermine the
intergenerational fiscal bargain already threatened by sharply reduced
taxes and higher public spending for older Australians that has occurred
over the past decade.[^9]

A common feature of expenditure tax approaches is that, unlike
Australia’s superannuation system, they do not tax the earnings on
savings. Taxing the earnings on savings reduces the incentives to save.
This might be justified if it discourages economic activity less than
alternative taxes. Taxes on savings may also be a means to a greater
degree of redistribution of income and wealth. Obviously the degree of
progressivity in the tax system is a value choice that is
contested.[^10]

This report does not deal with **harmonising the tax treatment of
different savings vehicles** in Australia. The different tax treatments
lead to distortions in the allocation of savings. Aligning the tax
treatment of savings income across different savings vehicles, as
highlighted in the Henry Tax Review, is an important avenue for future
reform. However, current budget pressures make it unlikely that the
Commonwealth Government will be prepared to collect less from more
highly taxed savings vehicles in the near term.

Although investigating the variety of tax treatments for savings is
beyond the scope of this report, on any view, superannuation is an
outlier, treated much more generously and much less progressively than
other savings vehicles ().

This report also does not advocate reforms to **other components of
Australia’s retirement income system**. Responding to the challenges and
opportunities of an ageing population and longer life expectancy
requires a holistic review of Australia’s retirement incomes system. A
comprehensive review of retirement incomes policy is beyond the scope of
this report. As noted in , previous Grattan reports have identified
other potential reforms to better target pensions and superannuation
policy, such as better targeting access to the Age Pension, and aligning
the preservation ages for super and the Age Pension. Future Grattan
Institute reports will explore these reforms in greater detail.

The report shows how superannuation currently works, and how it should work
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The following chapters describe in more detail how superannuation works
and what its objectives should be. Later chapters consider how existing
superannuation tax breaks do (and don’t) serve the purposes of
superannuation and assess options for reform.

Chapter 2 examines the **role and cost of superannuation tax breaks**.
It considers how the overall objectives of the superannuation system
have evolved and what the objectives should now be.

Chapter 3 examines the **distribution of superannuation tax breaks
overall** and assesses how much superannuation people need to sustain a
comfortable retirement.

Chapter 4 examines the tax breaks for **pre-tax contributions** to
superannuation. These allow people to save into superannuation from
their pre-tax income.

Chapter 5 examines **how much in total people can contribute** to
superannuation, including from their post-tax income. The more that a
person saves through superannuation, the less tax they pay on the
earnings on savings.

Chapter 6 examines **how much tax is paid on superannuation earnings**.
It focuses on provisions that result in no tax on super fund earnings in
retirement.

The role and cost of superannuation tax breaks
==============================================

Superannuation provides a number of tax breaks. Relative to saving
outside of superannuation, less tax is paid on money saved into
superannuation, and less tax is paid on the earnings.

The purposes of these tax breaks are contested because the broader
purposes of superannuation are poorly defined. The best analysis is that
the tax breaks aim to encourage savings that will supplement or replace
the Age Pension.

Superannuation tax breaks provide additional incentives to save. They
also recognise that superannuation compels people to save, and locks up
voluntary contributions until retirement.

Some analyses suggest that superannuation tax breaks are needed because
high-income earners paying income tax on the earnings of their savings
would not have enough incentives to save. However, even taxpayers on the
top marginal rate of income tax have reasonable incentives to save for
more consumption tomorrow rather than to consume more today.

In any case, many people, particularly high-income earners, save in
order to smooth lifetime incomes or to provide a legacy. Evidence from
around the world, confirmed by our analysis of the Australian system,
suggests that these taxpayers will tend to save about the same amount,
irrespective of the taxes on earnings.

Whatever the benefits of superannuation tax breaks, they must be
balanced against the costs – not least the budgetary costs, and the
costs of other taxes being higher. Superannuation tax breaks cost a lot
– over 10 per cent of income tax collections – and the cost is growing
fast.

Superannuation savings are the least important pillar of Australia’s retirement income system {#sec:Super-savings-are-least-important-pillar}
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Superannuation savings form part of Australia four-pillar retirement
income system, which is made up of:[^11]

1.  The **means-tested Age Pension**, provided by government, which
    guarantees a minimum ‘safety net’ level of income in retirement.

2.  **Compulsory saving through the *Superannuation Guarantee***,
    currently set at 9.5 per cent of wages.

3.  **Voluntary superannuation savings**, including voluntary pre-tax
    and post-tax super contributions.

4.  **Other voluntary savings** that can contribute towards living
    standards in retirement, such as other financial assets, and
    especially housing and other property.

Australia’s four-pillar retirement system is well regarded
internationally.[^12] It spreads the responsibility and risk of
providing retirement incomes in a fiscally sustainable way, and has
helped Australia deal with the challenges of an ageing population.

<span>Mean wealth per household by type and age, (2013-14
dollars)</span>\[fig:2-1\] ![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

Many commentators equate retirement savings with superannuation. But
superannuation savings (pillars 2 and 3) are the least important part of
Australia’s retirement incomes system. While Australians save in a
variety of ways, super is only 15 per cent of the wealth of most
households (). And while homes are a large part of accumulated wealth,
households of all ages, incomes and wealth typically have other
investments that are greater than their superannuation assets.[^13] For
older households, assets other than super are often even larger than the
value of homes.

These patterns partly reflect the immaturity of the superannuation
system.[^14] It will be another two decades before typical retirees have
been contributing at least 9 per cent of their wages to super for their
entire working lives. But even younger generations that have been paying
the 9 per cent Superannuation Guarantee since they started work tend to
save more outside superannuation.[^15]

As discussed in , the fact that Australians save for their retirement
through vehicles outside of superannuation has im-portant implications
for the amount of superannuation people need for a comfortable
retirement. In particular, it is unreasonable to ex-pect superannuation
savings alone to fund a comfortable living standard in retirement.
Rather, most retired Australians draw on a range of assets to support
their retirement – including housing and other investments outside of
superannuation.

Nor will superannuation replace the Age Pension as the most im-portant
component of retirement incomes for the vast majority of retirees. The
capital annuity value of the average Age Pension payments that
households aged 65 years and over can expect to receive over their
remaining lives is larger than the average super-annuation savings of
these households ().[^16] The present value of Age Pension payments that
will be received by those aged 55 to 64 years and set to retire in the
next few years is also larger than the average superannuation savings of
these house-holds.

Superannuation provides several tax breaks
------------------------------------------

There are two distinct phases in the tax treatment of superannua-tion
with varying tax treatments for contributions, earnings and payouts, as
shown in .

![Tax settings differ across each phase on superannuation<span
data-label="fig:2-2"></span>](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

**Contributions** to an individual’s retirement savings are made to a
nominated superannuation fund. Under the Superannuation Guarantee (SG),
employers are required to contribute to the retirement savings of their
employees by depositing a proportion of their wage (currently 9.5 per
cent) into a nominated superannuation fund.[^17] Employers are only
required to make SG contributions on the first \$200,000 of employees’
wages.[^18] Some workers also receive a higher proportion of their wages
in employer superannuation contributions, where this has been negotiated
under a collective agreement.

These ‘pre-tax’ compulsory contributions are taxed at a flat rate of 15
per cent rather than a person’s marginal income tax rate. Individuals
can also make voluntary contributions by salary sacrificing some of
their income, again taxed at 15 per cent. Individuals can also make
voluntary contributions by salary sacrificing some of their income,
again taxed at 15 per cent.[^19]

Individuals can also make ‘post-tax’ voluntary contributions to their
superannuation fund, financed from post-tax income, up to the annual
post-tax contributions cap of \$180,000. People aged over 65 can only
make post-tax contributions if they are still working[^20] Low-income
earners also benefit from a matching 50 per cent government
co-contribution on the first \$1,000 of post-tax contributions they make
each year.[^21] Since people have already paid tax on the income that
finances these post-tax contributions, no further taxes are levied when
they enter the super fund.

**Earnings** come from contributions, along with compounded earnings
from previous years, which are invested by the superannuation fund. In
the accumulation phase, earnings are taxed at a flat rate of 15 per cent
(10 per cent for capital gains). The effective tax rate on
superannuation fund earnings in the investment phase is typically lower
– ranging from 7 to 10 per cent depending on the mix of fund investments
– after taking into account dividend imputation credits for investments
in Australian equities.[^22]

Once in the benefits phase and aged 60, any earnings on funds in a
superannuation account are tax-free. The effective tax rate on
superannuation fund earnings in the benefits phase is negative since
funds pay no tax on earnings but receive full refunds on any unused
dividend imputation credits.[^23] The tax-free status of earnings for
retirees dates back to the era when superannuation benefits withdrawn
were taxable. Exempting earnings for account-based pensions avoided the
double taxation of benefits.[^24] However, since tax on benefits was
removed in 2007, this rationale for exempting earnings for retirees no
longer applies.[^25]

**Payouts** from the accumulated savings in the superannuation fund
begin in the benefits phase. Retirees can only start to withdraw their
superannuation ‘benefits’ after reaching the preservation age, currently
55 years of age.[^26] Benefits can be paid as either an income stream or
as a lump sum. Either way, payouts from the account are tax-free from
age 60. [^27]

The purposes of superannuation are becoming clearer
---------------------------------------------------

Despite assets of \$2 trillion,[^28] annual administrative and
management costs of \$21 billion,[^29] and tax breaks on contributions
and earnings costing \$25 billion in lost tax revenue each
year,<span>[^30]</span> the superannuation system does not have
legislated aims.

It is widely agreed, however, that the system should promote retirement
savings so that people enjoy a higher standard of living in retirement,
while reducing government’s future Age Pension liabilities, subject to
the budgetary costs of doing so. The recent Financial System Inquiry
recommended that the contemporary purpose of superannuation should be
‘to provide income in retirement to substitute or supplement the Age
Pension.’[^31]

Originally, the superannuation system was set up to achieve at least
four objectives:[^32]

1.  increasing local savings so that Australia was less dependent on
    foreign capital for economic stability

2.  increasing local savings that could be invested in infrastructure

3.  encouraging people to save more while they are working so they more
    to spend in retirement

4.  reducing future government liabilities for the Age Pension

The first of these aims – creating a pool of Australian capital for
investment in Australia – is less relevant today. It was conceived in an
era that was focused on the ‘twin deficits’ – current account and budget
deficits – and the concern that Australia was over-reliant on overseas
capital to fund its growth. With the increasing mobility of
international capital, it is less clear that this is a real economic
problem today. While Australian superannuation funds played a
significant role in financing the de-leveraging of corporate Australia
during the global financial crisis,[^33] the Financial System Inquiry
argued that ‘funding economic activity is a consequence of a
well-designed long-term savings vehicle that invests in the interests of
its members, rather than an objective in itself’.[^34]

Similarly, it is not clear that greater superannuation balances are
required to fund infrastructure. Only a small portion of the existing
pool is invested in infrastructure.[^35] There is no shortage of funds,
from both local and overseas investors, for Australian infrastructure
assets with proven cash flow.[^36] Investors are relatively reluctant to
support new infrastructure with uncertain returns.[^37] However, this
reflects the poor risk and return of these investments, illustrated by a
number of high profile failures,[^38] rather than any shortage of
capital.

Instead the superannuation system today is primarily about *consumption
smoothing* – maintaining a more consistent standard of living across
people’s lives.[^39] Superannuation encourages people to save while they
are working so they have more to spend in retirement.[^40] It is well
established that people tend to focus disproportionately on the short
term, leading many to save less for their retirement than is required to
maintain relatively consistent consumption levels across a
lifetime.[^41] Although superannuation leads people to save less outside
of superannuation than they would otherwise, it leads to higher *total*
savings at retirement (including superannuation).[^42]

Superannuation also requires governments to give up tax revenue today so
that governments do not have to spend so much on the Age Pension in
future. This encourages intergenerational equity since each generation
pays more of the costs of its own retirement, rather than imposing this
burden on the next generation.

So overall, the superannuation system is designed to promote retirement
savings so that people enjoy a higher standard of living in retirement,
but with less support from government through the Age Pension, reducing
the burden on future taxpayers.

However, superannuation does not and should not aim to provide limitless
support for savings that increase retirement incomes. We would all like
to be rich. But the benefits of higher retirement incomes must be
balanced against the costs of achieving them.

Similarly, the superannuation system should not seek to replace the Age
Pension entirely for all, or even most, retirees. The budgetary cost of
doing so would be crippling. The tax breaks would cost the budget much
more than the Age Pension. To ensure that a very large number of people
didn’t need an Age Pension, tax breaks would need to support *everyone*
to save enough to support themselves in retirement beyond average life
expectancy even if they don’t live this long. Given targeting would not
be perfect, there would be substantial tax breaks beyond those needed to
replace the Age Pension for most people.

For this reason, the Financial System Inquiry recommended focusing
superannuation on providing ‘income in retirement to substitute or
supplement the Age Pension.’ Implicitly, superannuation should not aim
to support the savings of those who already have such ample resources
that they are not going to qualify for even a part Age Pension.[^43] And
implicitly, superannuation should not provide limitless support to
savings regardless of the costs to reduce Age Pension liabilities.

Superannuation tax breaks play several roles {#sec:2-4}
--------------------------------------------

Within this superannuation system, what are superannuation tax breaks
supposed to do?

Superannuation tax breaks increase how much people have to spend in
retirement from whatever they do save, by reducing the taxes paid on
contributions and earnings.[^44]

Arguably, superannuation tax breaks also compensate people for being
compelled to lock up their savings in superannuation until
retirement,[^45] although there is no logical way of calculating an
appropriate amount of compensation for this or how it might be targeted.

The ‘value’ of this compensation is very unequally distributed, since
high-income earners receive a large tax break (in terms of tax avoided)
per dollar of compulsory superannuation contributions, whereas
low-income earners receive no compensation. In future low-income earners
(below the tax-free threshold) will be penalised for being compelled to
save if the Low Income Superannuation Contribution – which refunds the
tax paid on compulsory super contributions to those earning less than
\$37,000 – is abolished from 2017-18 as currently legislated. Ironically
the current system provides the least benefits through tax breaks for
compulsory savings to low income earners, even though this group tends
to have the greatest preference for immediate consumption rather than
saving.[^46]

<span>Real effective marginal tax rate on long-term savings vehicles,
per cent</span>\[fig:2-3\] ![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

Superannuation tax breaks are also supposed to encourage additional
savings, over and above compulsory contributions. The income used to
finance superannuation contributions is taxed less, and the earnings on
superannuation fund balances are taxed less than other forms of savings,
so that the real after-tax returns are better, for a given pre-tax
return, than can be achieved through other forms of savings, as shown in
.[^47] Most taxpayers who contribute to superannuation from their
earnings before tax have more to spend in retirement than if they had
saved their wages after tax, but paid no tax on the returns to their
savings. Those that put money into super from pre-tax income just before
retirement receive an even larger benefit since they avoid income tax on
the money saved, and then benefit from tax-free super earnings and
withdrawals once they retire.

Some commentators have argued that broad superannuation tax breaks are a
worthwhile step towards lower taxes on earnings on savings in
general.[^48] They argue that all savings income should be tax-exempt to
avoid any bias against savings.[^49] This argument is sometimes
buttressed by claims about tax rates on savings that sound extremely
high. While these grab headlines, they calculate tax rates on savings in
artificial ways that are very different from the way that effective tax
rates are typically calculated.

Australia’s personal income tax system already taxes most returns from
long-term savings at a lower rate than other income, or exempts them,
consistent with an expenditure tax approach ().[^50] Around 60 per cent
of household savings is concentrated in owner-occupied housing and
superannuation, where the returns to savings are taxed lightly, or not
at all.

However, it is not obvious that it is bad to tax the earnings from
savings. The UK’s Mirrlees tax review concluded that to avoid bias
against savings, only the risk free component of investment returns –
the ‘return to waiting’ – should be untaxed.[^51] Other recent analyses
have concluded that even the risk-free return to savings should be
taxed, albeit at a lower tax rate than other income.[^52] Alternatively,
it can be argued that all earnings from savings should be taxed at
marginal rates of income tax because savings tend to lead to
concentrations of wealth even more unequal than the distribution of
income.[^53]

Even if income taxes on savings were unreasonably high, tax breaks
specific to superannuation would be a poor solution to the problem. As
the progressivity of the tax system is a basic value choice, changes to
the level of progressivity should be made as transparent as possible.
The complexity of superannuation tax breaks conceals how they
effectively reduce tax rates for a limited set of taxpayers. Such
complexity increases the opportunity for well-resourced vested interests
to benefit at the cost of the public interest.[^54]

Savings outcomes are not affected much by tax rates or incentives {#sec:2-6}
-----------------------------------------------------------------

There is a more fundamental problem with claims that taxes on earnings
discourage savings and drag on economic growth. Taxes on savings have
limited influence on how much people actually choose to save,
particularly people with high incomes. Savings behaviour isn’t just
determined by the rate of return to savings after tax. Actual savings
are influenced by many factors including:

1.  how much *earnings* on savings increase the amount they have to
    spend (which is influenced by taxes on earnings)

2.  their life circumstances

3.  the desire to smooth spending over the life span

4.  the desire to leave a legacy

Tax incentives for saving – such as the superannuation tax breaks – only
affect the first of these drivers. In practice, life circumstances and
lifetime consumption smoothing often play a much larger role in savings
decisions. High-income earners often want to maintain a lifestyle in
retirement similar to that enjoyed while working. Typically this
requires much more income than the Age Pension would provide. They are
prepared to pay whatever tax is imposed to ensure a high standard of
living in retirement. By contrast, those on lower incomes tend to value
immediate consumption more than those on higher incomes.[^55]

<span>Percentage of new savings in tax-favoured retirement accounts, by
study</span>\[fig:2-4\] ![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

The empirical evidence from around the world confirms that those on
higher incomes are more likely to save, and they tend to save about the
same amount irrespective of tax rates. Most studies have found that tax
incentives for retirement savings have little effect on the total amount
saved, as summarised in .

However, those with higher incomes, and older savers, tend to switch
their savings into whichever investment vehicle pays the least tax.
@EngenGale2000, @AttanasioBanksWakefield2004, and @Benjamin2003 all find
that tax-advantaged retirement savings accounts have generated limited
new savings in the US, with most contributions ‘reshuffled’ from other
savings vehicles.[^56] @AyusoJimenoVillanueva2007 find a similar effect
for tax-favoured retirement plans in Spain.

Tax breaks for savings are more likely to generate additional savings
for those on low and middle incomes.[^57] People in those income
categories tend to value future consumption less (that is, they apply
higher discount rates),[^58] the Age Pension is not so much lower than
their current consumption, and savings can materially reduce their
future entitlements to an Age Pension.[^59]

In contrast, studies suggest that people on higher incomes, and those
close to retirement, @AyusoJimenoVillanueva2007 tend to use
tax-advantaged savings programs to reduce the tax paid on money they
would save anyway. A detailed study from Denmark showed that reduced
subsidies for retirement savings for high-income earners led to almost
no reduction in their overall savings efforts.[^60]

In Australia, there is only weak evidence that superannuation tax breaks
lead to increases in voluntary retirement savings. One recent study
concluded that ‘current tax incentives have a limited effect, if any, on
the decision to make salary sacrifice arrangements.’[^61] Only about 10
per cent of employees make salary-sacrificed contributions from pre-tax
income.[^62] Tax breaks on superannuation fund earnings may be a strong
motivation for those making voluntary post-tax contributions, but many
of these contributions appear to reflect tax minimisation strategies
rather than additional retirement savings, as noted in . The voluntary
flow of savings into superannuation does not necessarily mean people are
saving more; it merely implies that people are choosing to save in the
vehicle that pays the least tax.

Superannuation has supported higher savings overall, but mostly thanks
to compulsory contributions rather than tax incentives to save.[^63] A
recent Reserve Bank of Australia study found that each dollar of
compulsory superannuation savings added between 70 and 90 cents to total
household wealth.[^64] At the national level, @GruenSoding2011 estimate
that compulsory superannuation has already boosted private national
saving by around 1.5 per cent of GDP, and is expected to rise as the
Super Guarantee rises gradually to 12 per cent. And compulsory
superannuation savings – unlike the tax concessions – also prompt some
individuals to make further voluntary contributions.[^65]

These findings suggest that any tax breaks on savings should be targeted
towards low- and middle-income earners, where they will have the most
impact on voluntary retirement savings relative to the budgetary cost.
Unfortunately, Australia’s current system does the opposite, offering
tax breaks on savings that provide the most benefit to high-income
earners and are little-used by low- and middle-income earners.

The benefits of super tax breaks must be balanced against the costs
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Thus the welfare and efficiency losses from taxes on savings must be
balanced against the alternatives. All taxes reduce someone’s welfare –
they distort decisions away from what people would otherwise prefer.
Most taxes also reduce efficiency – they reduce the total amount of
economic activity. Those seeking to justify super tax breaks need to
show that they provide larger benefits in economic efficiency and
welfare than the cost of additional taxes elsewhere to make up the
shortfall.

Arguably, the fact that people tend to save almost the same amount
irrespective of the tax rate on savings means that savings should be
taxed more.[^66] From an economic perspective, taxes are generally
considered to be more efficient if they affect behaviour less in
practice than other taxes.

Current superannuation tax breaks are costly {#sec:2-8}
--------------------------------------------

Superannuation tax breaks are a large and growing cost to the budget
bottom line, and other taxes must be higher than otherwise to
compensate. The annual revenue lost in superannuation tax breaks – after
accounting for potential behaviour change and the interaction between
contributions and earnings tax breaks – is over \$25 billion.[^67] This
is well more than 10 per cent of personal income tax collections, which
raised around \$177 billion in 2014-15.[^68]

The leakage from the personal income tax base will increase, because the
costs of superannuation tax breaks are growing much faster than the
economy and tax collections. In 2015-16 superannuation tax breaks will
cost almost \$30 billion in foregone revenue, rising to close to \$40
billion by 2017-18.[^69]

<span>Revenue cost of superannuation tax breaks (billions, 2014-15
dollars)</span>\[fig:2-5\] ![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

The cost of contributions tax breaks is expected to continue to grow a
little faster than nominal GDP, at 4 per cent per year, rising to
**\$18.1 billion** in 2017-18 ().[^70] This reflects both wages growth,
population increase, and the fact that 60 to 69 year olds, who tend to
make larger voluntary pre-tax contributions to superannuation (Figure
A.7), will make up an increasing share of the population.

Tax breaks on earnings are expected to grow much faster at 23 per cent
per year, rising to **\$22.5 billion** in 2017-18. Inherently earnings
(and therefore tax breaks on earnings) tend to grow in line with the
pool of superannuation assets – driven by new contributions, earnings on
balances, less withdrawals. Total superannuation assets have more than
doubled in the last 8 years.[^71] In addition, the revenue from taxes
and the cost of tax breaks on fund earnings are expected to grow faster
than the pool of assets as superannuation funds use up tax losses
accumulated during the global financial crisis and carried forward. Tax
breaks on earnings are also expected to grow faster than the pool of
assets as a greater proportion of the pool comes to be held by those
over 60 in pension phase, who pay no tax on superannuation
earnings.[^72]

These trends are likely to continue into the future. In addition, the
government is planning to raise the Super Guarantee contribution rate to
12 per cent between 2021 and 2026. This will further increase the costs
of tax breaks to the budget as the level of funds channelled into the
superannuation system rises.[^73]

There has been extensive commentary about how changes to the tax breaks
will have less budgetary impact than the tax expenditure estimates
suggest.[^74] However, Treasury’s ‘revenue gain’ tax expenditure
estimates cited in this report already account for behavioural change,
whereby some people would put less into superannuation and more into
other vehicles where they pay less tax than their marginal rate of
income tax.

\[tp\]<span>Measuring the value and cost of super tax
breaks</span><span>box:super-tax-breaks</span> Superannuation tax breaks
mean that less tax is paid on money saved into superannuation, and less
tax is paid on the earnings, compared to if that money was saved outside
of superannuation. In this report, the value of superannuation tax
breaks, and their distribution among taxpayers, are measured against a
comprehensive income tax (or ‘TTE’) benchmark. Treasury estimates the
‘tax expenditures’ from super tax breaks by comparing the tax paid on
contributions and earnings against the tax payable if they were taxed at
marginal rates of income tax @Treasury2015TES2014.

As noted in , some commentators argue that an expenditure tax approach –
where no tax is paid on income from savings – is a desirable structural
feature of the tax system, and so the cost of super tax breaks should be
measured against such a benchmark. However, arguments about the best
policy for taxing savings should not be confused with questions about
how to measure their cost @DaleyWoodCoates2015. The income tax benchmark
remains the best measure of how much tax breaks cost. Absent
superannuation, savings would be taxed under this regime. Of course
there are tax breaks for other forms of savings, and these should be
measured against the same benchmark.

Treasury now also estimates the ‘revenue gain’ from abolishing super tax
breaks, which takes into account behavioural change. If superannuation
tax breaks were abolished, some people would move super savings into
vehicles that pay less tax than the benchmark marginal income tax rates.
However, the revenue loss from contributions tax breaks is largely
unaffected by behaviour change: there aren’t many ways outside of
superannuation for taxpayers to reduce the tax payable on the principal
invested.

In any case, behavioural change does not make much difference,
particularly for contributions tax breaks.[^75] Alternative savings
vehicles are much less generous than superannuation. Unlike other
savings vehicles, superannuation allows saving from pre-tax income (less
15 per cent), and imposes much lower tax rates (see ).

Some commentators argue that an income tax benchmark is not appropriate
for measuring savings tax breaks.[^76] They prefer the ‘pre-paid’
expenditure tax benchmark, where earnings and benefits are untaxed but
contributions are fully taxed at marginal tax rates (). Unsurprisingly,
the superannuation industry prefers this benchmark, which reduces the
apparent size of the tax expenditures.

However, this benchmark does not reflect the trade-off faced by most
people. Only a small proportion of the assets in super are owned by
people legally entitled to pay no tax on the earnings of their savings
outside of super.

Under a pre-paid expenditure tax benchmark, Treasury estimated that
contributions tax breaks cost \$16 billion in foregone revenue while the
earnings regime provides a gain to the budget of \$5.8 billion
(@Treasury2014TES2013). These estimates show that Australia’s
superannuation tax breaks cost \$10 billion more in foregone tax revenue
than if Australia adopted an EET system for taxing superannuation
savings, which is widely recognised as an amply generous tax treatment
for taxing retirement savings.[^77]

More recently, some have noted that the tax expenditure measures do not
account for the additional costs of higher Age Pensions in future if the
rules are changed.[^78] However, the changes proposed in this report
will have little impact on Age Pensions, as they are targeted at those
who are unlikely to qualify for much Age Pension anyway.[^79]

The targeting of superannuation tax breaks overall
==================================================

Superannuation tax breaks, as currently structured, are an unfair and
costly way to promote retirement savings. By value, most of the
superannuation tax breaks go to people on higher incomes.

In practice these people are likely to save enough, even without
superannuation tax breaks, so that they are unlikely to qualify for a
part Age Pension. The top 20 per cent of income earners at age 55 have
usually already acquired assets approaching \$2 million. Usually they
hold more financial assets outside of superannuation than within it. The
wealthiest 20 per cent of households headed by someone over the age of
65 have typically saved enough to generate a substantial retirement
income: 70 per cent of them have annual incomes over \$50,000, excluding
the Age Pension.

Those consistently earning more than \$115,000 a year are likely to save
enough just through compulsory superannuation contributions to enjoy an
affluent retirement. Their disposable income in retirement is likely to
be higher than that of most Australians during their working life. They
are likely to have a superannuation balance large enough to disqualify
them for the Age Pension for most, if not all, of their retirement
years.

Thus superannuation tax breaks for those consistently earning more than
\$115,000 are not required to reduce Age Pension liabilities. Nor can
they be justified on the alternative grounds that they compensate for
high tax rates on high-income earners.

Incomes tend to be fairly consistent. So those with high incomes in any
given year are likely to have high lifetime incomes. Consequently, it is
fair enough to target superannuation tax breaks on the basis of annual
incomes and contributions.

Superannuation tax breaks primarily benefit high-income earners
---------------------------------------------------------------

Superannuation provides much larger tax concessions per person to
high-income earners. Over half of the value of superannuation tax breaks
– for earnings and contributions combined – flows to the top 20 per cent
of income earners (Figure 3.1).

<span>Percentage of values of superannuation concessions per income
decile</span>\[fig:3-1\] ![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

High-income earners are likely to save without superannuation tax concessions {#sec:3-2}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

These high-income earners receiving most of the superannuation tax
concessions are likely to save and self-fund their retirement even
without government incentives to do so. Few households that have been
earning over \$100,000 a year plan to retire onto an Age Pension paying
at most \$34,000 a year.[^80] As shown by the savings tax literature
discussed in Section 2.6, higher income households around the world
typically save a substantial portion of their income, irrespective of
the tax rates on savings.

The actual behaviour of high-income households in Australia bears this
out. They tend to save substantially in the decade or so before
retirement. Wealthy retirees usually earn more from investments outside
of superannuation than inside.

High-income Australians approaching retirement have typically saved
substantial assets (). Households aged over 50 earning more than
\$100,000 a year have amassed average net assets worth more than \$1.7
million. Excluding owner-occupied housing, more than half of these
assets are invested outside of superannuation. This suggests that many
would save even if there were no superannuation tax concessions. This
investment pattern is typical for households of all ages and incomes ().

<span>Average wealth of households earning more than \$100,000 annually,
(millions, 2011-12 dollars)</span>\[fig:3-2\]
![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

The savings of high-income households before retirement is reflected in
their sources of income in retirement. The wealthiest retired households
typically earn more from superannuation than less wealthy households ().
But they also typically earn even more from other investments,
suggesting they would have saved for retirement regardless.

<span>Average income of retirees in 2009-10, by source</span>\[fig:3-3\]
![image](super-atlas/newPPTX.pdf)

<span>Average income of the wealthiest 20% of retirees, by
source</span>\[fig:3-4\] ![image](super-atlas/newPPTX.pdf)

There are not many exceptions. Of the wealthiest 20 per cent of retired
households, 70 per cent have annual incomes over \$50,000 (). Most of
this income is from sources other than the Age Pension and
superannuation.

These patterns may change a little as the superannuation system matures,
so that retired households earn more from superannuation than at
present. However, it is likely that households of all ages will continue
to invest more outside of superannuation than inside (). And high-income
households are likely to continue to amass wealth to fund their own
retirement, irrespective of the superannuation tax incentives.

Those earning over \$115,000 a year are likely to enjoy a comfortable retirement without an Age Pension {#sec:3-3}
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

At what level of income are people likely to self-fund their retirement
through superannuation and other forms of saving? Our analysis shows
that people who consistently have taxable income of \$115,000 per year
are likely to largely self-fund their retirement through their
compulsory superannuation contributions alone. Such people are earning
1.5 times average full time weekly earnings and are in the top 8 per
cent of income earners.[^81] Their superannuation savings, together with
private savings outside of superannuation, would probably give them
sufficient assets that they would not qualify for a part-rate Age
Pension for much or all of their retirement. The income from their
superannuation savings, together with some drawdown, would fund a
lifestyle in retirement more affluent than that enjoyed by over half of
Australians before retirement, and by more than two thirds of
Australians after retirement. In practice, people with superannuation
savings of that size are likely to have even more invested outside of
superannuation, and will therefore enjoy even higher incomes in
retirement.

A person earning \$115,000 a year would make compulsory superannuation
contributions of \$11,000 each year (indexed for inflation). This should
generate a superannuation balance of about \$588,000 (in \$2015) after
30 years (). With some superannuation accumulated by a second-income
earner, and savings outside super (beyond the family home), a couple
would be likely to amass combined assets well over \$805,025. On these
assets, retiring homeowner households would not be eligible for a part
Age Pension after 2017 (). Whether they ever qualify for a part Age
Pension will depend on the earnings on their assets, and how much they
choose to consume in retirement.[^82]

<span>Xl&gt;b<span>0.21</span>rr</span> & & \[-0.95ex\]

****

\[c\]<span>@&gt;p@</span>ASFA ‘comfortable’ lifestyle

&\
(lr)<span>4-5</span> & & & **2015** & **2017**\
Couple & owns home & \$640,000 & \$1,163,000 & \$805,025\
& renting & & \$1,312,000 & \$997,753\
Single & owns home & \$545,000 & \$693,250 & \$535,212\
& renting & & \$842,250 & \$727,940\

This level of superannuation assets would fund a ‘comfortable’ lifestyle
in retirement as defined by the Association of Superannuation Funds of
Australia (ASFA).[^83] However, calling this a ‘comfortable’ lifestyle
may be misleading: a pool of savings of that size would fund an
‘affluent’ lifestyle more luxurious than that enjoyed by the majority of
Australians even while they are working, let alone when retired (Figure
3.5 and Figure 3.6). ASFA’s definition of a ‘comfortable’ retirement is
based on a bottom-up calculation of spending that most Australians could
never afford. It would fund one Australian holiday a year, and an
international holiday every five years. It implies (post-tax)
expenditure in retirement of \$58,444 for a couple. Although this may
sound low relative to average full-time pre-tax earnings, retirees tend
to have lower expenditure as they are no longer saving, and typically
are no longer paying off a mortgage.

<span>Household expenditure, 2015 dollars</span>

![image](super-atlas/Figure3-5orig.pdf)

![image](super-atlas/Figure3-6orig.pdf)

A couple without assets that earned this much would only just qualify
for a small part-rate Age Pension (). It may seem surprising that a
household with a disposable income sufficient for an affluent lifestyle
can qualify for a part Age Pension. This results from the ‘taper rate’
for the Age Pension, which is set so that those beyond pension age still
have reasonable incentives to work part-time. Under the taper rate the
pension is reduced by 50 cents for each additional dollar of income. The
result is a small Age Pension for those with an income just over that
sufficient for an affluent lifestyle. In practice, such households are
also likely to be excluded from the Age Pension by the assets means
test.

<span>Xrr&gt;r&gt;r</span> & &\
(lr)<span>2-3</span>(lr)<span>4-5</span> **Household type** &
<span>Before tax</span> & <span>After tax</span> & &\
Single & \$49,429 & \$41,336 & \$24,438 & \$42,569\
Couple & \$75,655 & \$66,446 & \$33,799 & \$58,444\

Thus a person consistently earning \$115,000 a year is unlikely to
qualify for a pension on retirement, on the basis of their
superannuation assets alone. Some households that do not qualify for an
Age Pension on retirement will qualify later on if they consume their
savings in retirement – as the ASFA standards assume. Consequently,
greater savings may be required to minimise future Age Pension
liabilities.

In practice, however, most pensioners don’t draw down much of their
assets. Australian Government data show that less than half of all
pensioners draw down on their assets, and over 40 per cent of pensioners
are net savers.[^84] A recent study found that at death the median
pensioner still had 90 per cent of their wealth as first observed.[^85]
Another study found that many Australian retired households – pensioners
or otherwise – do not spend down much of their financial wealth as they
age.[^86] This suggests that those who do not qualify for a pension on
retirement are unlikely to draw down on their assets to the point that
they start to qualify for a material Age Pension.

In any case, the ASFA standard assumes that a household’s only
income-earning asset in retirement is a superannuation fund built on
compulsory contributions. In practice, someone earning \$115,000
annually is likely to save far more for their retirement than just their
compulsory superannuation contributions (), and as a result will have a
retirement much more prosperous than the ‘affluent’ benchmark as defined
by ASFA.

Some commentators have suggested that retirees need an even higher super
balance at retirement than that proposed by ASFA, and that Australians
need savings of up to \$1 million in order to generate an adequate
retirement income.[^87] Their analyses typically assume that retirees
are only prepared to invest their retirement savings in government
bonds, currently yielding around 2.3 per cent. This is clearly
unrealistic. Superannuation fund returns have averaged almost 6 per cent
a year since 2000.[^88] Such claims also ignore the role of the part Age
Pension in boosting the retirement incomes of retirees with post-tax
incomes of less than \$41,336 (singles) or \$66,446 (combined couples),
and ignore any other financial savings outside of superannuation.

Other commentators have noted that sustained low investment returns may
reduce the accumulated value of superannuation savings at retirement,
leading to lower retirement incomes. While lower returns are a risk to
retirement incomes, it does not follow that more generous superannuation
tax breaks should make up the difference. First, if investment returns
are permanently lower, then the target living standard in retirement
should also be lowered.[^89] Second, increasing the generosity of
superannuation tax breaks is an expensive way to boost the retirement
incomes of low and middle-income earners, as this report makes clear.
Most of the benefits from increasing superannuation tax breaks – such as
from raising the annual cap on pre-tax contributions or lowering tax
rates on super fund earnings – flow to high income earners that have
larger savings. Instead, concerns about the adequacy of retirement
savings in a world of lower investment returns should be addressed
through changes to the Age Pension.

Superannuation tax breaks are poorly targeted at those with variable incomes
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

What about those with more variable incomes? Concerns are sometimes
raised about how annual limits on contributions can disadvantage people
whose income varies a lot from year to year.[^90] This is a common
pattern for women who take time out of the workforce to have children.
Overall, annual earnings tend to rise to about age 35, and then stay
around that level until just before retirement.[^91]

This argument assumes that there are a material number of people who
return to the workforce after a substantial break and who have
sufficiently high incomes that they can afford to make substantial
contributions to superannuation. However, incomes in Australia tend to
be persistent. The longitudinal dataset of the @HILDA2015 survey, which
commenced in 2000, confirms that those who earn a lot in one year, tend
to earn a lot for many years ().

<span>Percentage of years in income decile for people of prime working
age who are in top income decile at least once</span>\[fig:3-7\]
![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

As the more detailed analysis in shows, people of prime working age who
are in the top income decile in any single year spent 85 per cent of the
13 years in which data was collected among the top 30 per cent of income
earners. Overseas studies confirm the finding that most high-income
earners in a given year tend to stay towards the top of the income
distribution for most of their working lives.[^92]

<span>People of working age who were in the top decile at least once
during the @HILDA2015 survey period</span>\[fig:3-8\]

Although volatility over a 35 year period would be greater than over the
13 years of longitudinal data available in HILDA, clearly high incomes
tend to persist.[^93] Furthermore, high contributions to superannuation
tend to be made later in life ( and ) when incomes tend to be more
consistent.[^94]

Of course, some people, particularly women, do have variable incomes.
But they are unlikely to be impacted much by limits that only affect
those contributing more than \$11,000 a year. As shown in , there are
relatively few women who contribute more than \$10,000 a year.

Policies to encourage adequate savings for those with irregular earnings
need to be far more targeted. In practice, the current rules that allow
substantial pre-tax and post-tax voluntary contributions to
superannuation are overwhelmingly used by those with high incomes ( and
) and who already have high savings ().

The current tax breaks are an expensive way for government to boost
retirement incomes for a relatively small group of lower income women
making ‘catch up’ payments. If government wants to increase the
retirement balances of women that have spent time out of the workforce,
reinstating the Low Income Superannuation Contribution (LISC) would have
far more impact on this group per government dollar than the current
superannuation tax breaks.

Superannuation tax breaks for those on high incomes do not materially reduce Age Pension costs
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As high-income earners are likely to save and self-fund their own
retirement anyway, superannuation tax concessions that benefit this
group do little to reduce future Age Pension liabilities. Treasury
projections show that the lifetime value of tax breaks to high-income
men is much higher than the value of the Age Pension for low-income
earners ().

<span>Net present value of the projected lifetime cost of government
support for retirement incomes (2010, dollars)</span>\[fig:3-9\]
![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

ASFA has criticised this analysis because it assumes that people remain
in the same income percentile amongst their age group for their entire
working life.[^95] As shown by , incomes are persistent, but not as
persistent as this.

However, the Treasury projections make other assumptions that
substantially understate the tax breaks for high-income earners. They do
not account for post-tax contributions, which are concentrated amongst
high-income earners and provide large breaks on super earnings in
retirement.[^96] Different assumptions about life expectancy and
draw-down rates can also result in much higher estimates of the lifetime
benefits for high-income earners. Industry Super calculates that
superannuation tax breaks for the top 5 per cent of income earners are
worth more than \$2 million for men over their lifetimes.[^97]

Thus the substantial superannuation tax breaks for high-income earners
do little to serve the purposes of superannuation: to encourage savings
to replace and supplement the Age Pension. High-income households are
very likely to self-fund their retirement, irrespective of
superannuation tax breaks, and consequently they are unlikely to qualify
for an Age Pension.

The primary effect of superannuation tax breaks on this group is to make
them even richer in retirement, without either affecting their savings
behaviour, or reducing government pension liabilities.

Superannuation tax breaks cannot be justified as compensation for not receiving the Age Pension {#sec:3-6}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some have suggested that superannuation tax concessions to high-income
earners are nevertheless fair because they provide government support
equivalent to that provided through the Age Pension to the less well off
(see ).[^98]

However, this muddles a tax break with a welfare payment. To use an
analogy, wage earners don’t expect tax breaks equivalent to Newstart
payments. That is because, by definition, welfare payments are made to
those who otherwise lack resources. The purpose of the Age Pension is to
provide all Australians with a safety net in retirement so that they
have enough money for a reasonable minimum standard of living when many
are no longer able to work. As with other welfare payments, the Age
Pension is targeted – via the income and assets means tests – to those
in need.

Superannuation tax breaks need to be targeted to meet their policy aims {#sec:3-7}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The targeting of superannuation tax breaks will never be perfect.
Superannuation will be far too generous for most households if the
limits are set so that a sole breadwinner can save enough assets solely
in super to support a couple in retirement without recourse to an Age
Pension. In practice, each member of couple households will have their
own superannuation, and will typically have other assets outside of
superannuation and their home.

If we consider the way tax breaks currently operate in Australia’s
superannuation system overall, it is clear that they are very poorly
targeted at promoting additional retirement savings that reduce Age
Pension liabilities.

1.  do increase retirement savings for middle-income earners (), and the
    associated tax concessions are arguably reasonable compensation for
    the compulsion to lock up earnings in superannuation (). But they
    still most benefit those on higher incomes who make larger
    compulsory contributions ().

2.  are mostly made by those aged over 50 – and therefore relatively
    close to the age of 60 at which they can start to withdraw
    these contributions. Those in the top fifth of income earners make
    over half of all voluntary pre-tax contributions ().

3.  are dominated by those already over 60. These contributions rarely
    increase retirement savings – they are primarily funded from funds
    already saved by those entitled to retire ().

Better targeting superannuation tax breaks does not imply removing all
contributions tax breaks for those earning more than \$115,000 a year.
However, the proposals set out later in this report would reduce them so
that in absolute terms the tax breaks for high-income earners are not
much bigger than the tax breaks for those earning less.

Previous reforms to superannuation tax breaks were piecemeal {#sec:3-8}
------------------------------------------------------------

Governments have repeatedly tweaked the tax breaks on superannuation
contributions, but none of these changes have made much difference
compared to the total size of the tax breaks. Given the escalating cost
of superannuation tax breaks, more substantial reforms are needed to
ensure budget sustainability.

Governments have changed the amounts that can be contributed to
superannuation from pre-tax earnings many times, as shown in .
Collectively these changes over the last 8 years have improved the
budget bottom line by around \$1 billion per year.[^99]

The value of superannuation contribution concessions for high income
earners were also reduced in 2012 when the Labor Government increased
the tax rates on concessional superannuation contributions for
individuals with income greater than \$300,000, from 15 per cent to 30
per cent. Treasury estimated that this reform – known as Division 293
tax – would boost revenue by \$475 million in 2015-16.[^100]

<span>lRRRR</span> & &\
(lr)<span>2-3</span>(lr)<span>4-5</span> Year & Age & Cap & Age & Cap\
2007-08 & under 50 &  \$50,000 & over 50 & \$100,000\
2009-10 & under 50 &  \$25,000 & over 50 &  \$50,000\
2012-13 & (all) & \$25,000 & \
2013-14 & under 59 & \$25,000 & over 59 &  \$35,000\
2014-15 & under 49 &  \$30,000 &   over 49 & \$35,000\

<span>Rr</span> &\
&

The incoming Abbott Government announced the abolition of the
LISC\[sec:LISC-to-be-abolished\] from 2017-18, at a saving of around \$1
billion in 2017-18.[^101] The LISC refunds contributions tax for
low-income earners, who would pay little or no income tax on the income
they are forced to contribute to super. Once the LISC is abolished,
those earning less than \$18,001 will pay higher tax on their
superannuation contributions than on their take-home pay.[^102]

Other government programs to support the superannuation balances of
low-income earners have also been reduced in the search for budget
savings. The former Labor government temporarily reduced the matching
rate for government co-contribution available to low-income taxpayers
who made a post-tax superannuation contribution from 150 per cent to 100
per cent in the 2009-10 Budget.[^103] This reduction was made permanent
in the 2010-11 Budget.[^104] The matching rate for the government
co-contribution was reduced again to 50 per cent in the Government’s
2011-12 mid year fiscal update.[^105]

Thus superannuation tax breaks need more substantial reform. They are an
unfair and costly way to promote retirement savings. Most of the value
goes to people on higher incomes who are likely to save anyway, unlikely
to qualify for an Age Pension, and not in need of government support.
And by definition, other taxpayers (often younger and less well off) pay
more in tax to make up for superannuation tax breaks. The frequent but
minor changes over the last decade have left a large gap between the
purposes of superannuation and its outcomes. Further changes to the
rules, which undermine stability and confidence in the system, will
continue until super tax breaks are targeted at the purpose of the
system.

Superannuation tax breaks should be reformed in a principled way
----------------------------------------------------------------

The remainder of this report investigates how the superannuation tax
breaks should be reformed so that they are more tightly targeted at
their purposes.

A number of principles should apply to any reforms to superannuation tax
breaks:

1.  Tax breaks that **don’t serve the policy purpose** of replacing of
    supplementing the Age Pension should be minimised.

2.  Tax breaks that **do encourage savings to replace or supplement the
    Age Pension** should be preserved.

3.  Where possible, **equity** should be maximised. This implies that
    superannuation should aim to provide more benefits to those on low
    incomes than those on high incomes. But this is not the primary
    focus of the superannuation system. Progressivity should primarily
    be achieved through the welfare and income tax system. On the other
    hand, superannuation tax breaks should not be designed for the
    primary purpose of reducing the progressivity of the income
    tax system.

4.  The **budgetary costs** of superannuation tax breaks should be
    minimised unless they are justified by the social benefits of those
    tax breaks.

5.  The system must be **administratively workable**. This needs to take
    into account both the starting point of systems in place, as well as
    the transitional issues of reform.

Of course these principles do not always work in lockstep. Some
arrangements may marginally increase savings that serve the purposes of
superannuation, but result in very large tax breaks for people who were
going to save for their own retirement anyway. In assessing any reform,
it is important to look at the balance of likely impacts.

Contributions tax breaks
========================

While about two thirds of contributions to superannuation are
compulsory, the remaining third are ‘voluntary’ contributions. All
compulsory contributions are ‘concessional’ – that is, they are made
from pre-tax income. Of the voluntary contributions, about a quarter are
pre-tax; the remainder are made from post-tax income.

The tax breaks on contributions disproportionately benefit high-income
earners: they save more tax per dollar contributed, and they contribute
more dollars. Voluntary pre-tax contributions over \$10,000 in a year
are mostly about tax planning rather than adding to net savings. Those
contributing more than \$10,000 a year are predominantly high-income men
aged over 50.

As a result, the tax breaks for contributions of more than \$10,000 a
year primarily benefit those who would have self-funded their retirement
anyway. Indeed, around 24 per cent of voluntary pre-tax contributions
are made by those aged over 60, entitled to withdraw their contributions
immediately.[^106]

The best way to reform these tax breaks would be to limit concessional
contributions to a maximum of \$11,000 per year. This change would
target superannuation tax breaks to those who need them to reduce and
replace their Age Pension. It would be relatively easy to implement, and
would improve the budget bottom line by around \$3.9 billion a year.

Superannuation contributions are made and taxed in a variety of ways
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Australians contributed around \$115 billion to superannuation in
2012-13 (Figure 4.1).

<span>Total contributions to all superannuation funds,
\$ billions</span>\[fig:4-1\] ![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

**Pre-tax contributions** make up 70 per cent of the total. A flat rate
of 15 per cent tax is usually paid on these contributions once they
enter the super fund, which is normally much less than the contributor’s
marginal income tax rate. If the contributor earns more than \$300,000,
a flat rate of 30 per cent tax is paid on these contributions.

Most pre-tax contributions – 60 per cent of all contributions – are
**compulsory contributions**, which employers are required to make, at
the super guarantee rate of 9.5 per cent on the first \$200,000 of an
employee’s earnings.[^107]

**Voluntary pre-tax contributions** – 10 per cent of all contributions –
are made when a worker salary sacrifices some of their earnings into
superannuation, or claims a tax deduction on superannuation
contributions (if self-employed).[^108] Pre-tax contributions are now
capped – at a total of \$30,000 for compulsory and voluntary pre-tax
contributions combined if the contributor is aged under 50, and \$35,000
if the contributor is over 50.

Annual contribution flows into superannuation funds can be volatile. The
recent decline in superannuation contributions in 2012-13, particularly
for voluntary concessional contributions, likely reflects the reduction
in the cap on pre-tax contributions for those aged 50 years and over
from \$50,000 to \$25,000, as well as the introduction of higher taxes
on concessional contributions for high-income earners (Division 293
tax). The recent plateau in compulsory pre-tax contributions may also
reflect weak wages growth, and a decline in the proportion of employees
receiving employer contributions beyond the SG contribution rate.[^109]

Generous tax breaks for pre-tax contributions disproportionately benefit high-income earners
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

People who earn more get the biggest benefits from superannuation
contribution tax breaks, both as a percentage of their income and in
absolute amount.

Those earning between \$180,000 and \$300,000 per year save 30 cents of
tax for each dollar contributed (). The majority of taxpayers – earning
less than \$80,000 a year – save 17.5 cents or less for each dollar
contributed. By contrast, those earning between \$18,200 and \$37,000
only save 4 cents of tax for each dollar contributed. For those earning
less than \$18,200 per year, the 15 per cent tax on superannuation
contributions increases their tax, since their income is otherwise
tax-free. The Low Income Super Contribution currently refunds this tax
paid by low-income earners, but is due to be abolished from 2017-18
onwards (See at page ).

\[fig:4-2\] ![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

High-income earners not only save more tax per dollar contributed, they
contribute many more dollars to superannuation. (, and see also ). Their
compulsory contributions are larger (because their wages are higher),
and they make higher voluntary contributions (presumably because with
higher incomes it is easier for them to save more).

<span>Average superannuation contributions for 2012-13 (in 2012-13
dollars)</span>\[fig:4-3\] ![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

In the over-50s age bracket pre-tax contributions from the top 10 per
cent of income earners exceed those of the bottom 60 per cent combined
(, and see also ). Indeed, this understates the skew: many low-income
earners do not file a tax return and therefore would not be included in
the ATO data analysed.

<span>Average concessional contributions for 2012-13 for people over 50,
(2012-13 dollars)</span>\[fig:4-4\] ![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

also highlights the generosity of the current cap on pre-tax
contributions. Even the top 10 per cent of income earners over the age
of 50 usually contribute only around half of the \$30,000/\$35,000
pre-tax contributions cap.

Most voluntary contributions are made later in life and are unlikely to increase net savings much
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Over half of all pre-tax voluntary contributions are made by those in
the top 20 per cent of income earners, and over half are made by those
over 55 ().

<span>Percentage of voluntary pre-tax contributions
2012-13</span>\[fig:4-5\] ![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

Around 24 per cent of voluntary pre-tax contributions are made by those
aged over 60 entitled to withdraw their contributions immediately, as
shown in the more detailed analysis by age and income decile in .

These super contributions do less to boost retirement incomes since they
compound for a shorter period before retirement. Very few people under
the age of 50 make material voluntary concessional contributions, even
when they are in the top 10 per cent of income earners ().

People making large pre-tax contributions are unlikely to qualify for an Age Pension
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Only 12 per cent of taxpayers – about 1.6 million people make pre-tax
contributions of more than \$10,000 in a year. Almost 1 million of these
are in the top 10 per cent of income earners (). Less than 5 per cent of
median-income earners make pre-tax contributions of more than \$10,000.
By contrast, 79 per cent of men (and 61 per cent of women) in the top
income decile contribute over \$10,000 ().

There are 163,000 women earning less than \$77,000 making pre-tax
contributions of more than \$10,000. In contrast, there are more than
900,000 men earning more than \$77,000 that contribute more than
\$10,000 a year from pre-tax income

Most of these high-income earners need little help to provide for their
own retirement. Often they are just making compulsory 9.5 per cent
contributions, which will be more than \$10,000 if they earn more than
\$105,000.

<span>Number of indiduals making pre-tax contributions exceeding
\$10,000, 2012-13</span>\[fig:4-6\] ![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

Most *voluntary* pre-tax contributions over \$10,000 are probably
tax-planning measures rather than additional savings. High-income
earners over 55 are much more likely to make voluntary pre-tax
contributions, and to sacrifice a large part of their income when they
do (). As shown in , one third of all voluntary pre-tax contributions to
superannuation over \$10,000 are made by people aged over 60.

<span>Value of pre-tax voluntary contributions to superannuation in
excess of \$10,000 in a year, 2012-13, \$2015-16 (by age)</span>
![image](super-atlas/PPTX.pdf)

Generally they can contribute from their pre-tax income, and then
withdraw their superannuation immediately. By recycling wage income
through their super fund in this way, middle- and high-income earners
can continue to consume their income immediately while substantially
reducing their tax liability. For workers aged between 60 and 64 years
earning between \$65,000 and \$150,000, this strategy reduces the amount
of tax paid by over \$5,000 (see ). The tax benefits for workers aged 65
years and over are even larger.[^110]

The ‘transition to retirement’ rules that allow workers between the age
of 60 and 65 to access their super were originally designed to allow
individuals to move from full-time to part-time work without reducing
their incomes. Superannuation withdrawals would compensate for lower
wages.[^111] However, recent evidence suggests that these rules are
mainly used by high-wealth individuals to reduce their tax bills while
they continue to work full-time.[^112]

Of course, some voluntary contributions made by over 60 year olds are
not immediately withdrawn and consumed in this way. However, these
voluntary contributions do not serve the purposes of superannuation if
the person would have saved anyway, or if they would not in any case
qualify for an Age Pension. More detailed analysis of annual
contributions by age and taxable income is provided in .

Superannuation contributions tax breaks could be reformed in a number of ways
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Various proposals have been made to target contribution tax breaks
better. We focus on three of these.

1.  This would reduce the maximum amount that can be contributed
    annually to super from pre-tax income (the ‘concessional’
    contributions cap) from \$30,000 (or \$35,000 for those over 50)
    to \$11,000. This could improve budget balances by around **\$3.9
    billion** annually. This cap would still allow taxpayers earning 1.5
    times average earnings to benefit from tax concessions for the full
    amount of super guarantee contributions made by their
    employer.[^113] The cap should be indexed to growth in wages
    (probably in \$1,000 increments) to prevent it eroding in
    real terms. The maximum superannuation contributions base would need
    to be reduced to \$115,000 so that workers are not compelled to make
    super contributions upon which they receive no tax concession.[^114]
    This policy is based on a proposal made in the Grattan Institute
    report .[^115]

2.  Those earning over \$300,000 already pay 30 per cent tax on
    contributions.[^116] This higher tax rate could apply from a lower
    income level, say \$115,000. This change would improve budget
    balances by around **\$3.8 billion** annually.

    The income threshold from which a 30 per cent tax rate applies would
    be indexed annually to average weekly earnings so that the value of
    the super tax breaks is not eroded over time. This design takes
    further proposals from the Australian Labor Party to apply a 30 per
    cent tax on contributions for those earning more than
    \$250,000.[^117]

3.  Taxpayers could contribute to superannuation at their current
    marginal tax rate, less a uniform 20 per cent rebate. We assume that
    the current cap of \$30,000/\$35,000 on concessional contributions
    remains in place.[^118] This policy would remove the penalty for
    those on low marginal tax rates making super contributions by
    providing a top-up payment to their super account. This could
    improve budget balances by around **\$1.1 billion**, while also
    improving the super balances of those on low incomes.[^119] This
    reform extends a proposal in the Henry Tax Review,[^120] recently
    taken up by Deloitte Access Economics,[^121] to tax contributions at
    the taxpayer’s marginal rate, less 15 per cent.

To mirror the benefit to low-income earners of the third proposal, the
first two reforms could be supplemented by the retention of the Low
Income Super Contribution beyond 2016-17 so that low-income earners are
not disadvantaged when contributing to super. This would cost around
**\$1 billion**.[^122]

Approaches and measures for tax rates on savings {#appendix:approaches-measures-for-tax-rates-on-savings}
================================================

[^1]: [@DaleyMcGannonSavage2013 29].

[^2]: [@DaleyMcGannonHunter2014 25].

[^3]: [@DaleyWoodWeidmannEtAl2014 22].

[^4]: [@DaleyWoodWeidmannEtAl2014 29].

[^5]: <span>Grattan analysis of</span> @ABS2015HouseholdIncomeWealth1314
    [@ABS2006HES0304].

[^6]: Australia had an <span>EET</span> system for pre-tax
    superannuation contributions until 1988 when the Hawke Government
    introduced taxes on super contributions and earnings, and reduced
    taxes on super withdrawals, creating a ‘<span>ttt</span>’ system.
    The Howard Government abolished taxes on super withdrawals in 2007,
    creating our present <span>ttE</span> system,
    @Treasury2008RetirementIncomeConsultPaper [44].

[^7]: @Mercer2015SubmissionToReThink. For example, the Commonwealth
    Government expects to collect \$6.1 billion in superannuation taxes
    in 2014-15. @Treasury2015FinalBudgetOutcome1415 [5].

[^8]: As proposed by @MaddockKing2015 [@Freebairn2015a].

[^9]: [@DaleyWoodWeidmannEtAl2014 2].

[^10]: [@Davidson2015].

[^11]: Some authors identify three pillars in the retirement income
    system, either by combining all superannuation savings into one
    pillar, or separating out compulsory and voluntary superannuation
    savings but ignoring voluntary savings beyond superannuation such as
    housing assets (see @Treasury2009aftsRetirementIncomeStrategicIssues
    [9]). More recent approaches distinguish between compulsory and
    voluntary superannuation savings, and note the importance of
    voluntary savings outside the superannuation system (@Derby2015
    [17]).

[^12]: [@Mercer2015].

[^13]: <span>Grattan analysis
    of</span> @ABS2015HouseholdIncomeWealth1314 [@ABS2013t]

[^14]: The Superannuation Guarantee was only introduced in 1992-93, with
    compulsory contributions rising from 3 per cent of wages in that
    year to 9 per cent from 2002-03, before reaching the current 9.5 per
    cent in 2013-14. The Super Guarantee rate will remain fixed at 9.5
    per cent until 2021. It will then increase by half a percentage
    point each year until it reaches 12 per cent.

[^15]: For a more detailed analysis of trends in asset holdings by age,
    see @DaleyWoodWeidmannEtAl2014 [14].

[^16]: This is consistent with estimates by the
    @ActuariesInstitute2015RetirementIncomes [7], which estimates the
    value of the full rate Age Pension for a people retiring today at
    the age of 65 at \$816,000 for couples, \$419,000 for a single man
    and \$482,000 for a single woman – far more than expected average
    super balances.

[^17]: The self-employed can make contributions directly to their super
    fund and claim a tax deduction for the tax already paid on that
    income on their tax returns.

[^18]: The maximum SG contributions an employer is required to make is
    determined by the maximum super contributions base, currently set at
    \$203,240 per year, and indexed annually to average weekly ordinary
    time earnings, @ATO2015MaxSuperContrBase.

[^19]: This is only possible for people whose employers offer salary
    sacrifice arrangements, or for self-employed individual who are
    eligible to claim a tax deduction on their post-tax super
    contributions. Otherwise, contributions not made through employers
    are made out of employees’ post-tax income.

[^20]: Those earning over \$300,000 pay 30 per cent tax on their
    concessional super contributions. The \$30,000 concessional cap for
    under 50s is indexed to wages; the \$35,000 concessional cap for
    over 50s is not indexed (@ATO2015ConcessionalContrCap).

[^21]: @ATO2015SuperCoContr [@ATO2015IncomeThresholdTest] Those earning
    less than \$35,454 benefit from the full government co-contribution,
    while those earning between \$35,454 and \$50,454 are eligible for a
    reduced co-contribution.

[^22]: For example, @Mercer2015GlobalPensionIndex [39] suggests that the
    net effective tax rate for many super funds in the accumulation
    phase is around 8 per cent.

[^23]: [@ATO2015RefundingImputationCredits; @FinancialSystemsInquiry2015
    Appendix B].

[^24]: [@HenryTaxReview2010].

[^25]: Some commentators have argued that tax-free earnings support
    encourages people to take their super benefit as an income stream,
    rather than as a lump sum. However, recent evidence suggests that
    people already draw down on their assets in an orderly fashion
    @ProductivityCommission2015SuperPolicyPostRetirement [16].

[^26]: The preservation age is set to rise from 55 today to 60 by 2024.
    Some benefits can be accessed prior to preservation age, such as
    those that accrued prior to 1999, @ATO2015WhenYouCanAccessYourSuper.

[^27]: Some superannuation benefits are not tax-free on retirement for
    over 60s, such as some defined benefit superannuation schemes. In
    these schemes benefits withdrawn may still be taxable where taxes
    liable on contributions and fund earnings have not already been paid
    in the fund. For more detail on the different tax treatment of super
    fund benefits when withdrawn, see @ATO2015HowTaxAppliesToSuper ATO
    (2015k) and @Mercer2015SubmissionToReThink [13].

[^28]: [@APRA2015JuneSuperPerformance].

[^29]: [@MinifieSavageCameron2015].

[^30]: See .

[^31]: [@FinancialSystemsInquiry2015 95].

[^32]: [@Greenwood2010].

[^33]: [@Henry2009; @RBA2014FinancialSystemInquirySubmission].

[^34]: [@FinancialSystemsInquiry2015 98].

[^35]: Only 4 per cent of funds managed by APRA-regulated superannuation
    funds are invested in infrastructure @APRA2015a [Table 1d].

[^36]: [@ProductivityCommission2013PublicInfrastructure 188].

[^37]: [@ProductivityCommission2013PublicInfrastructure 131].

[^38]: [@ElaurantMcDougall2015 10].

[^39]: [@MirrleesAdamBesleyEtAl2011 288].

[^40]: The superannuation system also aims in pension phase to encourage
    people to manage financial risks in retirement (@MaddockKing2015),
    an issue beyond this report’s scope.

[^41]: [@FinancialSystemsInquiry2015 4].

[^42]: [@GruenSoding2011; @Connolly2007].

[^43]: Of course, some of those that retire without qualifying for the
    Age Pension may qualify later in retirement as they draw down on
    their savings. The level of super savings required for a reasonable
    retirement, and where taxpayer support might be justified, is
    discussion in .

[^44]: [@Keating2015].

[^45]: [@Hockey2015IGR].

[^46]: There is good evidence that higher ability (i.e. higher earning)
    people are more patient and tend to save more (@BanksDiamond2010
    [616–623]).

[^47]: presents the effective marginal tax rates on savings compared to
    a pre-paid expenditure tax (or <span>TEE</span>) approach, where tax
    is paid on the income used to finance savings, but earnings and
    withdrawals are tax free. Comparing effective tax rates to a
    <span>TEE</span> approach shows the degree to which taxes on savings
    result in a bias for or against future consumption. A positive
    effective tax rate compared to a <span>TEE</span> approach implies a
    bias against future consumption, whereas a negative effective tax
    rate implies a bias towards future consumption. This approach is
    consistent with analysis of effective tax rates on savings contained
    in the Henry Tax Review and the UK’s Mirrlees Review. See
    @HenryTaxReview2010 [@Wakefield2009; @MirrleesAdamBesleyEtAl2011
    322].

[^48]: [@CarlingCowanErgas2015].

[^49]: Of course, this logic would only apply to superannuation it if
    were a full TEE system, with no concessional tax rates on any
    contributions.

[^50]: [@HenryTaxReview2010 12].

[^51]: @MirrleesAdamBesleyEtAl2011 [284] However, the authors also
    acknowledged that some taxation of the normal risk-free return from
    financial capital investment may be desirable to limit distortions
    between investments in physical and human capital (p. 311).

[^52]: @BanksDiamond2010. The authors point to evidence of a positive
    correlation between individuals’ earnings capacity and their
    willingness and ability to smooth consumption over their lifetime by
    savings, as well as greater uncertainty about lifetime earnings for
    those with low earning capacity.

[^53]: [@Leigh2013; @Piketty2013; @Ingles2015 23].

[^54]: [@Teles2013].

[^55]: [@DynanSkinnerZeldes2004].

[^56]: In contrast, @PoterbaVentiWise1996 summarizing various studies
    from Venti and Wise (1985; 1986; 1987; 1990; 1991) find a larger
    ‘new savings’ effect. However, there are a range of data and
    methodological problems with these studies, particularly, the
    failure to fully control for difference preferences between
    participants and non-participants in tax-advantaged savings programs
    or within these groups over time @EngenGaleScholz1996 More recent
    studies in @Benjamin2003 [@EngenGale2000] have attempted to overcome
    these issues by using improved data and techniques, and found very
    little new savings.

[^57]: @OECD2007EncourageSavingsThroughTaxPreferredAccounts A review of
    the experience of tax-preferred savings accounts in 11 OECD member
    countries suggests that that high-income people are most likely to
    participate in tax preferred savings plans but tax preferred
    accounts only create new savings when people of moderate incomes
    participate in them.

[^58]: [@DynanSkinnerZeldes2004].

[^59]: For example, see @BlundellEmmersonWafefield2006. The Age Pension
    does not discourage many high-income earners from saving, as their
    assets and income are likely to exclude them from accessing the Age
    Pension anyway.

[^60]: @ChettyFriedmanLethPetersenEtAl2014 is a particularly compelling
    study because of the quality and size of the data (41 million
    observations on savings for people from Denmark). Other studies
    drawing similar conclusions include @EngenGale2000 and
    @Benjamin2003.

[^61]: @Feng2014 consistent with .

[^62]: @ABS2013t The proportion of employees making salary sacrifice
    contributions has fallen sharply, from 50 per cent in 1993, as the
    Super Guarantee has expanded to cover most workers.

[^63]: By definition, superannuation tax breaks boost the post-tax value
    of compulsory superannuation savings. However, the value of the tax
    breaks only account for a small portion of the estimated impact of
    compulsory superannuation on overall household savings.

[^64]: @Connolly2007. That is, there was only a small offsetting fall in
    other savings in response to the introduction of the compulsory
    Superannuation Guarantee.

[^65]: @Connolly2007 [4]. Possible drivers of the increase in voluntary
    savings include greater awareness of the importance of retirement
    savings due to compulsory super, and the added convenience of making
    voluntary contributions into accounts already set up to receive
    compulsory contributions.

[^66]: [@Ingles2015 21].

[^67]: \[fn:81\]<span>Grattan analysis of</span> @APRA2014
    [@APRA2015JuneSuperPerformance; @Treasury2015TES2014]. The combined
    value of tax expenditures on superannuation contributions and fund
    earnings using the Treasury’s ‘revenue gain’ approach exceeded \$27
    billion in 2014-15, and is expected to rise to \$40 billion by
    2017-18 @Treasury2015TES2014. It is often cautioned that one cannot
    simply add together the Treasury’s ‘revenue foregone’ tax
    expenditure estimates for contributions and earnings tax breaks into
    one figure. However, we estimate the degree of ‘double counting’ in
    combining the ‘revenue gain’ tax expenditure estimates from
    abolishing each of these tax breaks at less than \$1 billion a year
    over that period. Alternatively, @ASFA2015TreasurySubmission [28]
    puts the combined annual revenue cost of contributions and earnings
    tax breaks at \$23 billion in 2014-15.

[^68]: [@Treasury2015BudgetPapers201516 4–14].

[^69]: See \[fn:81\].

[^70]: [@Treasury2015BudgetPapers201516 4–14].

[^71]: [@APRA2014 Table 7].

[^72]: @Warner2015SubmissionTaxWhitePaper [23] projects that the share
    of superannuation assets held in (tax-free) retirement pensions will
    rise from 32 per cent in 2014 to 38 per cent in 2029.

[^73]: For example, Treasury analysis undertaken for the
    @CooperReview2013 [13] estimated that the revenue foregone from
    superannuation tax breaks as a result of moving to a 12 per cent
    Superannuation Guarantee would exceed the budgetary savings from
    lower Age Pension spending by close to 0.5 per cent of GDP a year in
    the short-term, with the net budget cost only falling to 0.2 per
    cent of GDP a year by 2050. Based on these figures, the cumulative
    increase in Commonwealth public debt from increasing the
    Superannuation Guarantee to 12 per cent would exceed 10 per cent of
    GDP by 2050.

[^74]: [@Clare2015; @ASFA2015TreasurySubmission; @Mercer2013a; @Carling2015].

[^75]: @Treasury2015TES2014 [124]. Treasury’s ‘revenue gain’ estimate
    from abolishing contributions tax concessions assumes that all
    voluntary super contributions are directed towards other alternative
    tax-preferred investments, which are typically funded out of
    post-tax income. The estimate for earnings tax breaks accounts for
    lower contributions to super as it becomes a less attractive savings
    vehicle, and greater voluntary withdrawals from super in order to
    take advantage of tax-free thresholds and offsets available
    elsewhere in the personal income tax system.

[^76]: [@Carling2015; @Sloan2015].

[^77]: [@MaddockKing2015; @Freebairn2015].

[^78]: [@Mercer2013a 5–6; @FSC2015 13–14; @Clare2015 3].

[^79]: Half the value of super earnings tax breaks go to those in top 20
    per cent of income earners (vide <span>infra</span>). shows that
    people in the top 10 per cent of income earners are unlikely to
    receive much Age Pension over their lifetimes, particularly compared
    to the value of tax breaks they will receive.

[^80]: Combined couple rate of Age Pension, including Maximum Pension
    Supplement and Energy Supplement (@DHS2015IncomeTestForPensions.

[^81]: <span>Grattan analysis of</span> @ATO2015SampleFile1213
    [@ABS2013AWE].

[^82]: Just under 20 per cent of retirees currently aged 80 and over
    remain self-funded (i.e. don’t draw any Age Pension), compared to 35
    per cent of those aged 65 years
    @ActuariesInstitute2015RetirementIncomes [47].

[^83]: ASFA’s use of an inflation rate of 3.75 per cent (to reflect
    growth in nominal wages) in projecting forward the superannuation
    balance required at retirement to achieve its comfortable retirement
    standards overstates the balance required, since the nominal cost of
    maintaining the ASFA retirement standard is likely to only grow at
    around CPI: @RothmanBingham2004 [6].

[^84]: @Morrison2015TheBestFormOfWelfare. Around 45 per cent of
    pensioners were net savers in the first five years of receiving the
    Age Pension, and 43 per cent drew down on their savings. In the
    final five years of receiving the pension, 43 per cent of pensioners
    were still net savers, while just a third drew down on their
    savings.

[^85]: @WuAsherMeyrickeEtAl2015 find that younger, wealthier pensioners
    tend to draw down on their savings but most pensioners are net
    savers later in life.

[^86]: [@SpicerStavrunovaThorp2015].

[^87]: [@Cooper2015].

[^88]: <span>Grattan analysis of</span> @APRA2015JuneSuperPerformance.

[^89]: [@ActuariesInstitute2015RetirementIncomes 9; @Blayney2015].

[^90]: [@ASFA2015b 5].

[^91]: [@DaleyWoodWeidmannEtAl2014 18,19,49–50].

[^92]: [@LevellRoantreeShaw2015 56].

[^93]: For example, @ProductivityCommission2015d [96] finds that average
    income taxes for a given lifetime income align closely with the
    annual income taxes paid by someone with that same income in
    2014-15, suggesting that people’s annual and lifetime incomes are
    closely related.

[^94]: @Karahan2015 also finds that a large shock to income becomes less
    likely as workers age, and then becomes more likely again after age
    50.

[^95]: [@Clare2012 7–8].

[^96]: For example, @Blayney2015 estimates that 75 per cent of the
    accumulated lifetime value of investment returns occurs beyond the
    age of 60 years.

[^97]: For single men retiring to 2055. The projected lifetime cost of
    super tax breaks for single women in the top 5 per cent of income
    earners is \$1.6 million.

[^98]: [@ASFA2015TreasurySubmission 46].

[^99]: <span>Grattan analysis
    of</span> @TreasurymultipleyearsBudgetPapers200809to201516.

[^100]: [@Treasury2012 41].

[^101]: [@Treasury2013MYEFO1314 94].

[^102]: [@ATO2015LISC].

[^103]: @Treasury2009b. The super co-contribution was first introduced
    by the former Coalition government in 2003. The government
    originally provided a matching co-contribution of 150 per cent on
    the first \$1,000 of post-tax contributions made by low-income
    taxpayers.

[^104]: [@Treasury2010Budget1011no2 298].

[^105]: [@Treasury2011MYEFO1112 291].

[^106]: <span>Grattan analysis of</span> @ATO2015SampleFile1213.

[^107]: @APRA2014 [@ATO2015SampleFile1213; @ATO2015MaxSuperContrBase].
    ‘Compulsory’ contributions also includes employer contributions
    beyond the 9.5 per cent super guarantee rate that are negotiated as
    part of collective agreements. These additional contributions beyond
    the SG rate are estimated to account for around 7 per cent of
    ‘compulsory’ contributions, and cover almost 1 million workers
    @Kelly2013 [16].

[^108]: Income earners that do not have an employer making super
    contributions on their behalf, such as the self-employed, can access
    contributions tax concessions by claiming a tax deduction on super
    contributions they make directly to their super fund out of post-tax
    income.

[^109]: [@Kelly2013 15–16].

[^110]: Individuals aged 65 and over are also eligible for the Senior
    Australian and Pensioners Tax Offset (SAPTO), which can reduce their
    tax liability even further when recycling wage income through
    superannuation. @ATO2015e

[^111]: [@ASIC2015TransitionToRetirement].

[^112]: Of the estimated 5 per cent of eligible Australians (workers
    aged between 55 and 65) who received transition to retirement
    pensions in 2011-12, the majority were working full time and were
    relatively wealthy
    (@ProductivityCommission2015SuperPolicyPostRetirement [20]).
    However, data on self-managed super funds suggest the transition to
    retirement pensions are used by around half of eligible SMSF
    members. This probably reflects how SMSF members tend to have more
    wealth and manage their superannuation more actively.
    @ProductivityCommission2015SuperPolicyPostRetirement [144]

[^113]: A worker with annual earnings of \$115,000 would receive SG
    contributions from their employer of \$10,925, at the current 9.5
    per SG rate.

[^114]: Under the maximum superannuation contributions base, employers
    are obligated to make SG contributions on the first \$203,240 of
    employees’ wages. This equates to a maximum level of compulsory SG
    contributions of \$19,308 in 2015-16. The maximum super
    contributions base would be indexed to the same level each year as
    the concessional contributions cap.

[^115]: [@DaleyMcGannonSavageEtAl2013BalancingBudgets 32].

[^116]: ‘Division 293 tax’ imposes a 30 per cent tax rate on
    concessional super contributions from those whose earnings and super
    contributions exceed \$300,000 (@ATO2015HowisDiv293calculated). It
    was introduced in 2012 (@Shorten2012).

[^117]: [@ALP2015FairerSuper].

[^118]: At the time of the Henry Review, the cap was of \$25,000 or
    \$50,000 for people aged 50 or older (@HenryTaxReview2010 [100]).

[^119]: Analysis for the Henry Review found that such a proposal would
    have a budget cost of \$4 billon a year by 2017-18, but this assumed
    a simultaneous change that allowed an income earner to make two
    pre-tax contributions of up to \$30,000 each year, one to their own
    account and another to that of their partner. This costing also
    anticipated a higher cap of \$50,000 on the pre-tax contributions of
    those aged over 50 @Treasury2010SuperAdditionalMaterial
    @HenryTaxReview2010 [95].

[^120]: [@Treasury2010IGR 102].

[^121]: [@Deloitte2015TaxReformSheddingLight].

[^122]: [@Treasury2013PortfolioBudgetStatement1314 Table 2.16, p. 206].
